
Ns2 is an open source communications network simulator, primarily used in research and teaching. Ns2 provides substantial support for simulation of TCP, routing and multicast protocols over wired and wireless networks. Even though Ns2 is a widely used powerful simulator, it lacks a way to measure network that are used to assess reliability and performance metrics (e.g. the number of packets transferred from source to destination, the delay in packets, packet loss etc.) and it does not analyse the trace files it produces. The data obtained from the simulations is not straightforward to analyse. Ns2 is still unable to provide any data analysis statistics or graphics as requested. Moreover, the analysis of the Ns2 trace file using any software scripts requires further steps by a developer to do data processing and then produce graphical outputs
Lack of standardisation of tools means that results from different users may not be strictly comparable. There are alternative tools, but most of them are not standalone applications, requiring some additional libraries. Also, they lack a User-friendly interface.  In this poster we present the architecture and development considerations for NsGTFA (Ns2 GUI Trace File Analyzer) tool, which intends to simplify the management and enable the statistical analysis of trace files generated during network simulations. NsGTFA runs under Windows, and has a friendly graphical user interface. This tool is a very fast standalone application implemented in VC++, taking as input an Ns2 trace file.
NsGTFA has the ability to display 14 type of graphs in 2D and 3D formats (Points, lines and bars charts) or data-sets, whatever the trace file format (Tagged, Old or New). It is also possible to specify the output of standard network performance metrics. 
NsGTFA is the main module and it consists of 3 layers, the Work layer, Presentation layer, and the Data storage layer. Work layer is the highest and the main layer. It consists of 4 modules, the File Handler, Metrics, Main Processing and Graphs module. 
This layer loads and processes the Trace file (only old, new and tagged format are loadable) and then passes the output information to the middle “Presentation” layer. In the presentation layer the output information is displayed either in table, report or graph format as requested. Also, the output information can be stored in a metafile for easy access and future use in the lowest layer “Data storage”.

